so I'm 36 years old and my first
experience with the video game business
was neighbors who were wealthier than us
bringing home an Atari 2600 and playing
it and it was a pretty definitive moment
for me
I also remember going to school and on
an Apple to playing a game called where
in the world is Carmen Sandiego
which was the firt yeah awesome game
which was the first time I played a game
kind of in in the school context and
when you ask most people about the video
game business and what's significant
most people think that the Atari 2600 is
really sort of the Nexus the the
catalyst of the video game business but
I actually think that where in the world
is Carmen Sandiego is probably the most
important video game ever made
principally because it was the first and
the last time that parents teachers and
kids all agreed that a video game was
awesome
now that was a long time ago in fact it
was 1987 and it may surprise you to know
that where in the world is Carmen
Sandiego
continues to be the last substantial
giant hit in the edutainment business
despite the fact that it was 1987 which
is such an incredibly long time ago and
I'm only 36 so you can do the math that
things are completely different today
from when they were just as a simple
example in 1987 we thought this guy was
kind of crazy then we met this dude who
has really changed our perspective on
that subject things have changed
anti-bush palooka humor goes a long way
in Western Europe okay
so between 1987 and now I played a lot
of this game called civilization which
was designed by a guy named Sid Meier in
fact I spent about eight to ten thousand
hours of my life playing civilization
which is a long time I probably should
have spent studying but nonetheless I
managed to turn this love of video games
into a job first working on the game
developers conference helping to start
the first successful digital
distribution company in games called try
media and then now writing the
gamification blog and I'm author of two
books on the subject of gamification
including the recent games occasion by
design published by O'Reilly and I chair
the gamification summit which is an
event that brings all this stuff
together so in many ways I am parents
sort of dream of how somebody can turn a
sedentary lifestyle playing video games
into an actual career that pays real
money and so when I get invited to an
event like this I'm sure that all of you
expect me to get up here and say games
are awesome for your children right
because I'm a games guy and this is how
I make my living
games will help children but instead I
want to ask you a different question
which is really who needs games help and
so I I started this process by thinking
about reading a particular article in
The New York Times recently and in the
article a neuroscientist was talking
about how children were presenting
themselves with attention deficit
disorder and their parents would come in
and they'd say my kid can't possibly
have a VD because they're super super
good at focusing on video games but when
they go to school they're really bad and
the neuroscientist was debunking this
idea right in the article she trotted
out researchers like dr. christopher
lucas at nyu who said games don't teach
the right kind of attention skills right
where kids have sustained attention
where they're not receiving regular
rewards and she trotted out experts like
dr. dmitri Christakis at the university
of washington who said that kids who
play a lot of video games may find the
real world unpalatable or uninteresting
as a result of their sensitization to
games and so i sat there and i thought
to myself scratching my head and i
thought to myself is it that our
children have a DD or is our world just
too freakin slow for our children to
appreciate
seriously consider consider the picture
you're looking at right now like my in
my in my error even my grandfather's era
sitting down on a Sunday afternoon to
read a good book with a cup of tea like
I just have to say I don't think that
today's kids are ever going to do that
and the evidence is found in the games
that they play consider the video game
world of warcraft when i was growing up
the maximum skill that I was expected to
display in a video game with simple
hand-eye coordination a joystick and a
like firing button today's kids play
games and they're expected to chat in
text and voice operate a character
follow long and short-term objectives
and deal with their parents interrupting
them all the time to talk to them kids
have to have an extraordinary
multitasking skill to be able to achieve
things today we never had to have that
it turns out things like that actually
make you smarter research by RN MA at al
at the University of Regensburg in
Germany found that when they gave
participants and this was actually done
on adults simple tasks to learn like
juggling in twelve weeks people who were
asked to learn juggling display a market
increase in gray matter in their brain
on an MRI you can see people get more
gray matter after 12 weeks of learning
juggling and in 2008 they went back and
redid the study to see why the gray
matter increased and they discovered it
was the act of learning that produced
the increased gray matter not
performance at the activity itself which
is a very very interesting finding it
also may reinforce this idea which
should go over well here as well that
multilingual people outperform
monolingual people on most standardized
tests by about fifteen percent there's
something that happens in the brain from
that kind of activity and Andrea Kooskia
speaking at harvard talked about these
five things that people do to increase
their gray matter and to teach
themselves to increase their fluid
intelligence and fluid intelligence as
the intelligence we use to problem-solve
it's different from crystal and
intelligence it helps us problem-solve
and she identified from the research
that there were five things you could do
seek novelty challenge yourself think
creatively do things the hard way
and network think about those five
things any of you play video games does
it resemble
the basic pattern of a video game to you
in anyway these are five things that
recur in all very successful video games
and it also is connected to a constant
and exponential increase in learning
video games fundamentally present a
continuous process of learning to users
they don't just learn for a little while
and then stop they're constantly
evolving and moving forward it may in
fact help us to explain the Flynn effect
finally and the Flynn effect for those
who don't know is the pattern that human
intelligence is actually rising over
time so if we look at the history of IQ
people in fact are getting smarter in
the u.s. right now average IQ is rising
at point three six points for likeyou
per year now what's been very
interesting is that in some countries
not to call anyone out but Denmark and
Norway in some countries overall
crystalline IQ has stopped or slowed
down or declined in other countries
though particularly we're looking at
fluid IQ fluid intelligence the number
is increasing and the rate of fluid
intelligence increase is increasing
starting in the 1990s coincidence
I think not in fact games are wired to
produce a particular kind of reaction in
people right so we've got this learning
brain increase multitasking brain
increased connection we also have a
strong dopamine loop in the brain so as
games present a challenge and you
struggle to achieve that challenge and
you overcome it dopamine is released in
your brain and that produces an
intrinsic reinforcement in the words of
duty that produces an intrinsic
reinforcement that causes you to go back
and let keep seeking that activity over
and over and over again so this is
really really powerful stuff and I want
to introduce you to an educator who
understands this in intricate detail
named Anant PI an unthe was a very
successful businessperson who worked on
process re-engineering when his kids
went into school in White Bear Lake
Minnesota suburb of Minneapolis st. Paul
he saw the education system and decided
he wanted to do something about it so as
an adult he went back and got a master's
in ed and took over a class at White
Bear Lake Elementary School and ananth
pi replaced the standard curriculum with
a video game based
making them of his own design separating
the kids into learning styles and giving
them Nintendo DS's and computer games
everything off-the-shelf nothing custom
giving them Nintendo DS's and computer
games that were both individual and
social to play that taught the math and
language and let me tell you what
happened in the space of 18 weeks 18
weeks mister PI's class went from a
below third grade level in reading and
math to a mid fourth grade level in
reading and math in 18 weeks of a game
based curriculum and more importantly
when you talk to the children when
they're interviewed on television even
away from mr. pie when they're
interviewed on television they say two
things over and over again that helps
them learn in his class learning is fun
and learning is multiplayer whether they
use those exact words or not they say
learning is fun and learning is
multiplayer and this is the key to
making that experience really successful
for kids it's also true though that we
need to talk about the relationship
between kids and violence and games
study after study very clearly tells you
that violent games do not make children
violent we also must acknowledge however
if you have a child predisposed to
violence violent games may help make
them a better violent child if they
train kids to do other things they also
will train that and we need to accept
that and we need to start understanding
the connection between games as a form
of training we can't blanket say you
know they don't affect kids it's not
true I like to call the group of people
who are really driving this trend for a
generation G and there are 126 million
Millennials in the United States and the
EU plus younger kids who we can't yet
count that form generation G and what
generation G is different in the way the
generation G is different from X Y and
all the different generations that that
we may belong to is that video games are
the primary form of entertainment that
generation G is consuming it is their
primary form of entertainment and this
is already starting to have a tremendous
effect on society all around us
Generation G's desire for game-like
experiences is reshaping industries from
Foursquare which cause the mobile social
networking ecosystem to actually start
to companies like Nike you know and Coke
and Chase and also core Zynga which
shows
you know much of its success to games
the trend that underlies this whole
pattern is called gamification and it's
a word that many of you I'm sure have
heard and a simple definition of
gamification is it's the process of
using game thinking and game mechanics
to engage audiences and solve problems
part of the reason why gamification has
become such an emergent topic right now
is because of Generation G's effect on
culture and society already their
expectations are different some examples
of gamification that you may have seen
that are really fascinating to me are
the emergence of in-dash games in cars
today if you buy a hybrid or electric
plug-in electric vehicle you will almost
certainly see the product of a hundred
million dollars worth of tooling and
research and development in the form of
a tamagotchi style game in a dashboard
designed to make you a more ecological
driver
it is a simple sort of most of the game
mechanics are very simple a plant grows
as you drive more ecologically and
withers if you don't like those virtual
pets tamagochi this is an example of you
know gamification at work another really
interesting example is a thing called
speed camera lottery designed by Kevin
Richardson based in San Francisco works
from MTV awesome guy and this is the
concept in speed camera lottery you know
those speeding cameras that you pass by
and they take your picture and send you
a ticket so in many Scandinavian
countries the ticket that you get is
actually based not on how fast you were
going but how much money you make so the
more you make the bigger the ticket so
kevin reengineered a speeding camera in
sweden that instead of just giving
tickets to people who drive over the
speed limit to pass the camera anybody
who drives under the limit is entered
into a lottery to win the proceeds of
the people who speed
it is game thinking that term I
described earlier the core foundation of
gamification it is game thinking in its
purest and most beautiful form take a
big negative reinforcement loop and turn
it into small incremental positive
reinforcement loop it had the effect of
dropping speed by over 20% at the point
of intervention corporations have also
become aware of the trend of
gamification and the effect of games on
people like Generation G Gartner group
says that by 2015
70% of all the global 2000 the biggest
companies in the world will be actively
using gamification and 50% of their
process of innovation will be gamified
which is an astonishing astonishing
thing it's a huge change and what this
all points to is a future that looks
pretty different from the world that we
live in today Generation G and those
driving the gamification mean forward
are advocating for a different world
it's a world in which things move at a
faster pace than they did for you and me
it's a world in which there are rewards
everywhere for actions that people take
the rewards don't always have to be cash
rewards they can be meaningful status
rewards meaningful access rewards
meaningful powerful power rewards a
world in which there is extensive
collaborative play this is one of the
things that Generation G does so much
differently than even my generation I
mean I remember going to school and
teachers struggling to come up with
exercises that we could do as a team
that would be graded as a team right in
the end those group exercises always
boil down to an individual score which
distorted the way that people behaved
but Generation G plays a lot of games
that are purely collaborative in which
there is group value and this will also
affect our world and untold ways and
generation gee the fun future is a much
more global world it turns out that we
are already out of touch we are the
generation most out of touch with our
future or current children than any
generation in history we like to think
that baby boomers parents were the most
out of touch people right in the world
they're the ones who had to deal with
the like Summer of Love and sex and
drugs and all that kind of stuff we
still make phone calls I mean we are the
ones with the problem and we are going
to be the most out of touch generation
in the history of course it's also true
and I'm here to tell you and I will be
the one to tell you the kids are all
right they're going to be just fine and
we we don't need to worry
strictly speaking about kids and games
and the effect that it will have on the
world and not just are the kids going to
be all right frankly the kids are going
to be awesome but it's going to take
your help to make the kids awesome and I
have a prescription for you this is the
best prescription anybody is ever going
to write in your life but I'm going to
write it for you right now in your mind
I don't have an actual pad and just for
clarity disclaimer I'm not actually a
doctor right so I am going to however
write a prescription for you all and
this is the prescription that if you
have children or you work with children
or you desire to work with children or
you want to change the world this is the
absolute positive best thing that you
can do with your time from now until I
see you in the retirement home on the
coast of Spain or in the virtual world
wherever you choose to retire which is
get into the game with your kids stop
fighting the game trend if that's where
you are right now don't fight the game
trend become one with the game enter the
game understand and understand the
dynamic of how your children play the
games that they play understand how
their minds work from the context of the
game outward rather than from the world
outside inward the world that we live in
right now the world of Sunday afternoons
drinking a cup of herbal tea reading
some old book chilling out by the window
is over
and that's okay there's a lot more
things that we can do that are fun and
engaging and if you take away one thing
from today's presentation I hope it is
you get a chance to go play with your
kids thank you